---
title: The Privy
date: 2021-04-29 09:00:00
tags:
    - short fiction
category: fiction
keywords:
    - magic realism
---

The walls have echoes as if they gossip all around her about what she had done. The little, abandoned rest stop with red cement walls had no floor but dirt and a broken aluminum piece which at some point, in better conditions served as a roof. The rain muffled by the walls and the aluminum, like rapid silenced gunshots. The rain thudded the soil, losing it up underneath her sandals, turning the soil into mud that sneaked into her toenails turning her feet into burnt wood. 

She held the digger which was almost the same height as her. Pacing inside the little room. Her face was wet, with an equal ratio of the pouring rainfall of spring and her uncontrollable sweating like one does during the hell-inspired summer days. It was a similar situation in the palms of her hands and between her thighs where life is birthed. She licked her upper lips to wet the dryness, also cleaning her few mustache hairs of the salty sweat it accumulated. Neither fear or regret shook her restless, it was the dissatisfaction as if she realized the act hadn't been enough to please the nerves that rocked her body every night depriving her of sleep. 

She had driven as far as she could from the hamlet, what remained of Soyatango, through the road with no lights.  She drove slow yet steady, gazing out of the window into the meadows on both sides of the road with trees so tall they were omniscient, hovering over the entire road. 

*Those trees have seen it all*, she thought to herself, *they have seen the frantic growth of our town and its rapid descent. They have seen the women of Soyatango, but they have seen the men as well.*

With one hand navigating the steering wheel and another clutching on to the heavy golden cross necklace that hanged loosely around her fragile neck. She had found flat terrain that had suffered harsh abuses from the winter days. Flat terrain at this high of an altitude was a rarity. Having only infertile soil and dumped garbage, it had been abandoned of all attention, secluded from any form of life. Not even the mystical powers of the rain season which blossomed forestry and flowery everywhere else seemed to take effect in this rock-like soil. She remembers it. 

This flat land at some point served to host market stands for horses, then cars, as they journeyed to Soyatango from other villages and cities. Soyatango was a hub of the pretty and the pure, its festival of roses during the hot weeks in June brought people from the entire country to the small village. The harvested roses were sold to big merchandisers in Moro and it was what had driven the pesos alongside the tourism these same roses brought. Roses were like weeds for the people of Soyatango, they had lost the romanticism that great poets held for them, because they were ordinary, even mundane. If a man of Soyatango brought his wife roses for a date it was disrespectful, he might as well have given her dirt from the ground. 
 
 Not Eduardo, he would not even bring dirt for her if not only to toss it at her like a public shaming. *Hijo de Puta*, she thought.
 
The land on the side of the route was where the vendors would set up, near the only pit stop in the long trip through the roughened road. The flat terrain was perfect to set up the small plastic tables, often with an umbrella to cover them from June's sun, by the women who forged all sorts of elaborated crafts, using roses in a way not even the most creative prose could describe. All woman would set up their small table around the pit stop which had the privy that tourists all longed for. The spots closest to the pit stop were the most desired by the sellers. It was a race for the first one there each dawn could reserve the spot closest to the pit stop. This way they had every opportunity to take hold of the tourists, and their wallets, who in desperation to focus on keeping the trousers from wetting would buy whatever the seller put on their face, as long as it wasn't a drink, so they would leave them alone. 

Teresa was always the first one, rising before even the sun would dare, losing sleep but gaining the best spot to set up her table and sell her aromatic rose balms. 

"Learn to share Tere", would complain Mariela and the other women to her, partly in jest but with a bit of truth lingering on their tones. 

"You earn what you earn, sell better crap that's my advice", would say Teresa with a snarky tone. 

She didn't feel much pity for them, selling cost her a lot of effort, sleep, and trickery.  She would always stop the men by blocking them on their tracks, placing all five stubby feet in front of them, and holding out her chubby calloused hands with her products. She would yell the price at least three times every time, and if they were foreign-looking she would say in the few English she had learned "for you wife, for you wife!" Teresa had learned that foreign men are not like the men of her country. For her they were more like women, they displayed with what seemed as shameless honesty that their women had to be pampered and pleased. It worked every time. When this short rigid woman stood in front of them with her laconic presence and said with certainty "for your wife", they were compelled. Maybe it was the fear that their wife might have overhead and then be upset that they didn't buy the roses for them. 

It could also often be shame, at the fact that they imagine for a split second in their lizard-brains how it must feel to fuck this 'exotic' five-foot woman with sharp cheeks, light skin, and blackened hair, so they buy the flowers for their wives as repentance to themselves. 

Teresa is not pretty now and was not pretty then per se, she looked like a much taller, beautiful woman who had been pressed down and shrunk. Her facial bones were too sharp, her hands had miles and her skin was filled with moles and spots like a cancerous tree. Her eyes, however, were endearing and her smile was shy, combined with her small stature it gave men the essence of innocence that some find attractive. 

The rain was now pouring with more intent, it knew what she had done and it wanted to drown her with her sorrows, at least that's what she thought. The pacing continued inside the walls, Teresa started thinking of how she got here in the first place. She used her nails to pick at her callouses, the dirt-stained it all. It was almost ludicrous for her to reminisce what Soyatango used to be, but it became inevitable. The town of rose was who bared her to life, and it was what troubled her most.

The villagers romanticized the roses not for their arousing aroma, but for the monetary value. Soyatango in a short amount of time become a prospering village, with a growing population, with all the men working the land for the roses and the women packaging and selling them at the markets. The few lucid, fast-tongued villagers managed the relationship with the companies in Moro who exported these magnificent roses, especially for the day of cupid. 

There were talks of establishing a proper township in Soyatango because it was growing peso by peso. It was men like Eduardo who led the village not by title but by attitude and sharp jawline. They led prayer as much as they led the men into the fields to work, and their hard work brought everyone prosperity. Teresa loved that about her husband because it made him a good label for her, Eduardo Tujillo's Wife, they used to say in the shops. It would get her free spices or fruits and discounted *cafe*, endless tabs, and lustful onlookers. Their two daughters were snatched up for good men in haste, they were Tujillo's kids, and with that came quick matches. Most men worked on picking roses, dethroning them, and drinking. The roses were not owned by anybody, it was cherished good that all enjoyed. Eduardo and some others would contact some *compadres* in the city, and make the trip by *burro* to deliver their sale. Then the bounty would be then split among all the men, along with the surplus of roses which is what the women would use to sell in the markets and fairs. The burros were soon replaced by a couple of red Toyota FJ40 Cruisers with wooden racks in the back to carry the roses. She would display jewelry, and so would all the other women, as they all prospered together. The demand from the city was growing with more foreigners importing from sellers in Moro. 

It did not take long for the companies to stop buying from the villages like Soyatango when with the power of science or witchcraft or both they began to imitate the climates these villages enjoyed in the mountains, inside of glass-protected rooms with polythene and aluminum. The wind was harnessed and controlled, the heat was fabricated by little transmitters, electrical discharges, and buttons. Roses grew whether there was rain outside or not, and the merchandisers from the city grew with them. Soyatango's roses could no longer afford to hire the men to harvest because they were no longer needed by the big merchandisers from the city. The women could no longer harass the tourist to buy roses and treats, the terrain became solemn of visitors, because roses now grew in the city and the town between mountains became lost in it's mist. 

Some men and women saw no other choice but to seek work at these rose 'farms', having to leave their role as villagers and become IDs. Others stayed, and their staying was hope for even more others, which as time passed it became despair because there was no way to earn, only roses which had nothing but colors to offer the villagers. Time which was once spent working the field of roses was now used to drink chicha and liquor, complain about the companies which had stolen from them everything, and to fight over trivial matters. Some even dunked roses into their liquor for the sake of seeing the petals burn in their drink, it was healing. Jewels were replaced by bruises. 

The flat terrain with the sole pit stop on the way to the village had now turned into a dirt-filled wasteland where the only few visitors were the occasional drunks who drank themselves dead and those who wished to buy the services of a woman who was not their wife, but due to their decency wished to be discreet. 

Years after, now, Teresa with wrinkles across her cheeks stood in the same terrain where she had sold her balms and bars of soap infused with rose petals from a recipe her grandmother had taught her. Inside the once sought-after pit stop, on top of the soil floor which had received more urine than rain. 

She stood with a shovel in hand and her face darkened by dirt and sweat. The rain slowed after downpouring with ferocity, the few drops now slammed on the aluminum making the sound muffled. Her head was hurting, it was pained with remorse. She wasn't sure if it was because she had done it or because she hadn't done it sooner. She dug around the privy, hoping for her digging to meet with the deep tunnel made for all the shit, so she could throw her husband where he belonged.